\documentclass[a4paper,12pt]{scrartcl}
\usepackage{pslatex} % -- times instead of computer modern

\usepackage[colorlinks=true,linkcolor=black,urlcolor=blue,citecolor=black]{hyperref}
\usepackage{booktabs}

\usepackage[latin1]{inputenc}

\newcommand{\code}[1]{{\texttt{#1}}}
\newcommand{\cmd}[1]{{\texttt{#1}}}
\newcommand{\dirent}[1]{{\texttt{#1}}}
\newcommand{\menuitem}[1]{\textsf{\textbf{#1}}}

% 'stolen' from lshort.sty
% By Tobias Oetiker
%
% Some commands for helping with INDEX creation
%
\newcommand{\bs}{\symbol{'134}}%Print backslash
%\newcommand{\bs}{\ensuremath{\mathtt{\backslash}}}%Print backslash
% Index entry for a command (\cih for hidden command index
\newcommand{\eei}[1]{%
\index{extension!\texttt{#1}}\texttt{#1}}
% probably add handling of period like handling of \ in \ci
\newcommand{\fni}[1]{%
\index{font!#1@\texttt{\bs#1}}%
\index{#1@\texttt{\hspace*{-1.2ex}\bs #1}}\texttt{\bs #1}}
\newcommand{\cih}[1]{%
\index{commands!#1@\texttt{\bs#1}}%
\index{#1@\texttt{\hspace*{-1.2ex}\bs #1}}}
\newcommand{\ci}[1]{\cih{#1}\texttt{\bs #1}}
%Package
\newcommand{\paih}[1]{%
\index{packages!#1@\textsf{#1}}%
\index{#1@\textsf{#1}}}
\newcommand{\pai}[1]{%
\paih{#1}\textsf{#1}}
% Index entry for an environment
\newcommand{\ei}[1]{%
\index{environments!\texttt{#1}}%
\index{#1@\texttt{#1}}%
\texttt{#1}}
% Indexentry for a word (Word inserted into the text)
\newcommand{\wi}[1]{\index{#1}#1}

\begin{document}

\title{An Introduction into the \\Design Flow for JOP}
\author{Martin Schoeberl\\martin@jopdesign.com}
\maketitle \thispagestyle{empty}

\input{flow}

\bibliographystyle{plain}
\bibliography{../../bib/all}

\end{document}

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%% old stuff %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%


Getting Started

This page (should) contain the information you need to get JOP
running in an FPGA. The description assumes you are using an Altera
FPGA (EP1K50 or Cyclone). The boot logic is for a board like Cyclone
Board.

This documentation is not up-to-date. The organization of the source
files has changed. However, this introduction is still usefull. The
prelinked file for JOP has changed the file extension from .bin to
.jop. As this file was never a real binary this name is better. The
.jop file is a plain ASCII file with some comments to debug changes
in the class structure. The file has a format that can be included
in an array definition in C. Therefore you can generate a single
executable with the C version of JopSim (e.g. a software JVM on
NIOS).

The java subdirectory is split to:

    * tools: There you will find the assembler for JOP and JopSim
    * target: The is the main directory of Java applications for JOP.
      The resulting .jop file is placed under dist/bin
    * pcsim: An environment to simulate Java programs trageted for JOP on a PC. E.g. The real-time classes RtThread or a small Swing application to simulate the IO-ports from baseio.
    * pc: various tools such as an UDP client to program the FLASH on the Cyclone board.

In each of these directory you will find a small batch file
(doit.bat) to compile the sources. Tools you need:

    * JavaTM 2 Platform, Standard Edition Java compiler and runtime.
    * Quarts II Web Edition VHDL synthesis, place and route for Altera FPGAs.
    * Jam STAPL Byte-Code Player FPGA configuration in batch mode (jbi32.exe or different name).
    * Download Cable The schematic for the ByteBlasterMV can be found at: Data Sheet

Booting In the final application boot works as follows:

    * The watchdog generates a reset on power up for the MAX7064.
    * MAX7064 loads FPGA configuration for Cyclone from flash.
    * Cyclone starts with internal generated reset.
    * JVM is started (jvmflash.asm) and loads Java program from flash to ram.
    * Java program is started.
    * Application has to toggle the watchdog input.

How is the flash programmed and is there a faster way for
development?

There are two ways to configure the FPGA and two ways to load Java
programs: Configure FPGA The FPGA is configured in passive serial
mode when loaded from flash. Neverless, the JTAG pins are also
connected to the ByteBlaster connector. This means it can also be
configured from Quartus. To switch between these two modes the
MAX7064 has to be reprogrammed:

    * cyc_conf.vhd (cyc_conf.pof) for flash mode.
    * cyc_conf_init.vhd (cyc_conf_init.pof) for JTAG mode.

Load a Java program There are two versions of the JVM: One loads the
Java program from flash, the second from the serial line (115200, 8,
n, 1).

    * jvmflash.asm for flash mode.
    * jvm.asm for serial line mode.

Design Flow This is a short description to build JOP from ground up.
But you can use any precompiled files or project files from the ZIP
archive for a short cut. MAX7064 PLD Create a new project with
Quartus:

    * File -> New Project Wizard
    * Next
    * Select working directory: .../cycconf
    * Change project name and top-level design entity to 'cyc_conf_init'
    * Next
    * Select as design file ../vhdl/config/cyc_conf_init.vhdl
    * Next
    * Next
    * Select as device: MAX7000AE
    * 'Yes' for a specific device
    * Next
    * Select EPM7064AETC44-10
    * Next
    * Finish
    * Compile with: Processing -> Start Compilation

Now the correct pinout has to be defined. This can be done in
Quartus or by editing cyc_conf_init.csf. Close Quartus and copy the
the pin definition from cyc_conf_pins.csf (in directory vhdl/config)
to the relevant section of cyc_conf_init.csf. Start Quartus again:

    * File -> Recent Projects -> ...\cyc_conf_init.quartus
    * Compile again: Processing -> Start Compilation

Check the pinout! It can be found in the Compilation Report or as
cyc_conf_init.pin. It should look similar to cyc_conf_init.pin.

You can now program the EPM7064:

    * Tools -> Programmer
    * Processing -> Auto Detect
    * Double click on the first entry and select cyc_conf_init.pof
    * Enable Program/Configure for the EP7064
    * Processing -> Start Programming

You can save this configuration with: File -> Save

Do the same for cyc_conf.vhdl the configuration of the EPM7064 to
load the FPGA from flash (without programming of corse). FPGA
configuration The JVM is written in 'JOP Assembler' and Jopa
generates some vhdl and mif files:

In directory asm these files have to be built:

    javac ..\java\com\jopdesign\tools\*.java
    java -cp ..\java com.jopdesign.tools.Jopa jvm.asm
    copy *.vhd ..\vhdl

There is a litte batch file for this: doit.bat.

Now we create a new project for JOP in Quartus:

    * File -> New Project Wizard
    * Next
    * Select working directory: .../cycjop_min
    * Change project name and top-level design entity to 'jop'
    * Next
    * Add following design files:
      ..\vhdl\top\jopcyc.vhd
      ..\vhdl\core\ajbc.vhd
      ..\vhdl\core\aram.vhd
      ..\vhdl\core\arom.vhd
      ..\vhdl\core\bcfetch.vhd
      ..\vhdl\core\core.vhd
      ..\vhdl\core\decode.vhd
      ..\vhdl\core\fetch.vhd
      ..\vhdl\core\mem32.vhd
      ..\vhdl\core\mul.vhd
      ..\vhdl\core\shift.vhd
      ..\vhdl\core\stack.vhd
      ..\vhdl\io\uart.vhd
      ..\vhdl\io\cnt.vhd
      ..\vhdl\io\fifo.vhd
      ..\vhdl\io\iomin.vhd
      ..\vhdl\io\uart.vhd
      ..\vhdl\offtbl.vhd
      ..\vhdl\bcfetbl.vhd
      ..\vhdl\jtbl.vhd
    * Next
    * Next
    * Select as device: Cyclone
    * 'Yes' for a specific device
    * Next
    * Select EP1C6Q240C6
    * Next
    * Finish
    * Compile with: Processing -> Start Compilation

Check some assignments with: Assignments -> Device -> Device & Pin
Options.

    * Configuration: passive serial
    * Unused Pins: as inputs, tri-stated
    * Voltage: Default I/O standard: LVCMOS

Now the correct pinout has to be defined. This can be done in
Quartus or with a provided tcl-scrip. This scrip can be found in
directory tcl. Copy cypins.tcl to the working directory (I don't
know how to call a tcl-script from any directoy in Quartus). Execute
it as follows and compile again:

    * Tools -> Tcl Scripts
    * Select cypins
    * Run
    * Compile again: Processing -> Start Compilation

Check the pinout! It can be found in the Compilation Report or as
jop.pin. It should look similar to jop.pin.

JOP is now downloaded to the board with:

    * Tools -> Programmer
    * Processing -> Auto Detect
    * Double click on the second entry and select jop.sof
    * Enable Program/Configure for the EP1C6
    * Processing -> Start Programming

You can add the program file for the MAX as above and save this
configuration with: File -> Save Java program Now it's time to
compile our first Java example and download it to JOP! Under
java/test the program Clock.java keeps the watchdog led blinking and
writes the time to the serial line.

Java programs are compiled as usual (javac) but must be preverifyed
and linked. This is done with jcc.jar. The resulting .bin file can
now be downloaded via serial line. A small C program down.c does
just this.

In directory java use doit.bat:

    rem
    rem usage: doit pkg MainClass
    rem
    rem javac -classpath .;jcc.jar runtime\*.java

    javac com\jopdesign\sys\*.java
    javac java\lang\*.java
    javac javax\joprt\*.java

    del %1\*.class
    del util\*.class
    del ejip\*.class
    del test\*.class

    rem classes for simple tests
    java -cp jcc.jar;. JavaCodeCompact
        -nq -arch JOP -o %1/%2.bin %1/*.class
        java/lang/*.class com/jopdesign/sys/*.class

    pause
    rem javac com\jopdesign\tools\JopSim.java
    rem java com.jopdesign.tools.JopSim %1\%2.bin

    rem jbi32 -dDO_PROGRAM=1 -aPROGRAM ..\jbc\es_init.jbc
    rem jbi32 -dDO_PROGRAM=1 -aCONFIGURE ..\jbc\es_init.jbc
    ..\down -e %1\%2.bin COM2

    rem java -cp pc Flash %1\%2.bin

Change the COM port for the download and call it this way:

doit test Clock

After the download JOP is running your first Java program :-) Flash
programming There is a short java program for JOP to program the
flash: Mem.java. A small C program amd.c can be used to program FPGA
configuration (.ttf) and Java programs (.bin).

Step by step:

    * Generate flash version of JVM: in directory asm call doit jvmflash.
    * Compile JOP with generation of jop.ttf.
    * Rename jop.ttf to jop_flash.ttf.
    * Generate serial version of JVM: in directory asm call doit jvm.
    * Compile JOP again.
    * Configure Cyclone in Quartus.
    * Download Mem.java.
    * Program configuration: amd cycjop_min\jop_flash.ttf COM1.
    * Program Java file: amd java\test\Clock.bin COM1.
    * Program MAX7064 with cyc_conf.pof.
    * Start e COM1 for serial echo (and hand-shake signals).
    * Switch power off and on (MAX7064 needs a reset for the new configuration).

To simplify programming the flash with your design you can download
program.zip. Unzip it to an empty directory and call:

    program your_design.ttf COM1

Changes for ACEX board: a little bit outdated, perhaps helpfull.
Booting In the final appliction boot works as follows:

    * WD generates reset on power up for MAX7032.
    * MAX7032 loads FPGA configuration for ACEX from flash.
    * MAX7032 generates reset on FPGA.
    * JVM is started (jvmflash.asm) and loads Java program from flash to RAM.
    * Java program is started.
    * Application has to toggle WD input.

How can the flash get programmed and is there a faster way for
development?

There are two ways to configure the FPGA and two ways to load Java
programs: Configure FPGA The FPGA is configured in PPA mode when
loaded from flash. The JTAG pins are also connected to the
ByteBlaster connector. This means it can also be downloaded from
MAX+PLUS II. To switch between these two modes the MAX7032 has to be
reprogrammed:

    * confacx.vhd (confacx.pof) for flash mode.
    * pld_init2.vhd (pld_init2.pof) for JTAG mode.

MAX7032 PLD The PLD has to be programmed first:

Generate a project in Leonardo with pld_init2.vhd or open
pld_init2.lsp in directory wrk. Leonardo project files use absolute
path, so you have to edit the file for your directory structure.

Select device EPM7032AETC44 and check the output file. It should be:
../wrk/pld_init2.edf.

Run Flow

Generate a project from pld_init2.edf in MAX PLUS and run the
Compiler.

Check the pinout in the report.

To program the PLD you have to setup the JTAG chain: Open the
programmer window and enable under menu 'JTAG' 'Multi-Device JTAG
Chain'. Set up the Chain: First device: EPM7032AE with pld_init2.edf
and second device: EP1K50. This setup can be saved or restored
(e.g.: ../wrk/jc_init.jcf).

In the programmer window select 'Program' ('Configure' is used to
configure a FPGA). FPGA configuration

Generate a project in Leonard and Compile it (like above). As an
example see ../wrk/jopcore.lsp or use it.

Generate a project in MAX PLUS and define the pins. The simplest way
to define the pins is:

    * After project definition close MAX PLUS.
    * Open project.acf and copy a definition from pins.txt (see: -- pins for jopcore (2002/05) .
    * Compile the project in MAX PLUS.
    * Check the report for pinout and that VCCIO is configured for 3.3V!.

Important part of the report: jopcore.rpt

Change JTAG chain to include jopcore.sof (not .pof!) for EP1K50 and
configure FPGA.

JOP is now listening on the serial line to load a Java program.
